# Roseobacter_pseudogene

Here I provide some further instructions to the identification of pseudogenes in roseobacter genomes, which was originally used in our study 

Chu, X., Li, S., Wang, S. et al. Gene loss through pseudogenization contributes to the ecological diversification of a generalist Roseobacter lineage. ISME J 15, 489–502 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-020-00790-0


# Preparation
1. It's strongly recommended to install **ruby** https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/installation/ before using the scripts. The reason is because I have prepared the scripts written in Ruby for some simple data processing and related stuff. Of course, it is possible to write your own scripts instead of using my Ruby scripts.

2. After installation of Ruby, do the following in bash (**you need to go into this folder first**).
```
export RUBYLIB=$RUBYLIB:$PWD/scripts/prepare_scripts/lib
gem install bio parallel
```

Make sure that the installation of these packages is successfull.
```
ruby scripts/checkRubyPackages.rb
```

3. **[Optional]** If you want to do filtering (i.e., steps 3-6), make sure that bedtools (https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is successfully installed and its path is added to the environment variable *PATH*. Otherwise, if you only want to perform the original Psi-Phi, this is not necessary.


# Step 0: files
1. genomic annotation: Have your genbank files named as **"taxon.gbk"**.

2. genome sequence: Have your genome files named as **"taxon.fas"**. In case there are more than one contig, remember to merge all contigs into a single (pseudo)chromosome (the script Psi-Phi modified by Siyao will remove the pseudogenes identifed by the program whose locations happen to span two contigs in later steps). Also, name the "pseudochromosome" generated by the above step the same as the file name. For example, if the name of the file is *roseobacter123.fas*, then the name of the "pseudochromosome" should be "roseobacter123" and in the format of a fasta file it should be like *>roseobacter123*.

3. protein sequences: Have the protein files named as **"taxon.faa"**. Also, the name of each protein sequence should be named as "taxon|protein_id" where the taxon is the name of the file. For example, if the original name of the protein sequence is *protein123* and it is from the species *Bradyrhizobium_sp_123*, the name of this sequence should be named as *Bradyrhizobium_sp_123|protein123* (don't forget the ">" in front of the sequence name in the fasta-formatted file).


# Step 1: all-against-all tblastn
Let's first prepare the tblastn databases for each genome:
```
for i in data/*fas; do b=`basename $i`; c=${b%.fas}; makeblastdb -in $i -dbtype nucl -parse_seqids -out ./data/$c; done
```

Enter the folder *data* and run tblastn in batch.
```
cd data
ruby scripts/do_blast_in_batch.rb --seq_indir . --db_indir . --cpu 10 --nt 4
```
The name of the BLAST output should look like "roseobacter.vs.bradyrhizobium.blast", if the query is roseobacteria.faa and the subject is bradyrhizobium.fas.


# Step 2: Run Psi-Phi
Make sure that you are in the folder "data". If not, type ```cd data```.

Run Psi_Phi module1
```
perl ../scripts/scripts_for_Psi_Phi/batch.module1.pl
```

Note that there might be some warning messages but it's fine to ignore them based on my experience. I'm unsure what it means as the researcher who modifies the corresponding script has graduated (Siyao Li).

Run Psi_Phi module2
```
perl ../scripts/scripts_for_Psi_Phi/batch.module2.pl
ruby ../scripts/scripts_for_Psi_Phi/module2.in_parallel.rb
```

Be sure to make all input files in the same folder (or you could edit the original scripts). The output should be like "roseobacter_use_bradyrhizobium" where you can find the info for each pseudogene identified by PsiPhi


# Step 3: Summarize the result of Psi-Phi
**Go back to the parent folder of data**
```cd ..```

Summarize the result of Psi-Phi
```
ruby scripts/prepare_scripts/from_pseudo_to_bed.rb --indir data/ --outdir filtering/prepare --force
```
Note that pseudogenes that overlap with at least 1 bp will be merged into a "larger" pseudogene in the file *filtering/prepare/all_pseudo.txt* which we will be using in subsequent filtering steps. You can change the distance cutoff of merging the pseudogenes identified by Psi-Phi by using *-d*. This is done by *bedtools count* (see https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/content/tools/cluster.html for more details). In case you would like to merge only those with overlaps of >= 10 bp, you can set this parameter as *-10*.


# Step 4: Generate tblastn results
```
ruby scripts/process_scripts/check_pseudogene_aln.rb -i filtering/prepare/all_pseudo.txt -g data -p data --cpu 12 --outdir filtering/tblastn_result --force
```


# Step 5: Further filtering
```
mkdir filtering/single_query

ruby -F"\t" -alne 'next if $F[0]!~/\w/; a=$F[4].split(", "); n=a.size; n ==1 and puts a[0]' filtering/prepare/all_pseudo.txt | sort|uniq -c | awk '{print $2"\t"$1}'|sort -nk 2 > filtering/single_query/ori.list
```

We will then filter out the pseudogenes identified by an ORF that identifies say >=5 "pseudogenes" by Psi-Phi. The logic is that, if a so-called ORF identifies too many pseudogenes, then we think that it is more likely that this "ORF" is wrongly annotated or suspicious. Note that in the original paper we used an arbitrary cutoff 10, but in the example files provided here we use 5 as there are only 10 genomes.
```
for i in 5; do awk -v i=$i '{if($2>=i){print $1}}' filtering/single_query/ori.list > filtering/single_query/$i.list; done
```


# Step 6: Final step
```
ruby scripts/process_scripts/find_orf.rb --check_indir filtering/tblastn_result/ -g data/ -p data/ --cpu 16 -i filtering/prepare/all_pseudo.txt --problematic_query_list filtering/single_query/5.list --outdir filtering/filter_5 --force
```


# Step 7: analyze results
```
for i in filtering/filter_*; do ruby scripts/process_scripts/get_final.rb -i filtering/prepare/all_pseudo.txt --include_list $i/orf_cov_80.list  --include_list $i/short_query.list --include_list $i/long_query.list > $i/all_pseudo.filtered.txt ; done
```
The final result will be output in the file *filter_X/all_pseudo.filtered.txt*. You may want to make a comparison between this file and the pseudogenes originally identified by Psi-Phi (*filtering/prepare/all_pseudo.txt*). In this example dataset, there are 84 and 364 pseudogenes in these two files, respectively. So it is apparent that applying filtering greatly reduces the no. of pseudogenes in the analyzed genomes.
